<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-CA">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-night-of-taras" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Night of Taras</h2>
			<p>
				<span>By the road the Kobzar sat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his kobza played.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him youths and maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like poppy flowers arrayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the Kobzar played and sang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of many an old old story;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wars with Russian, Pole and Tartar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ancient Cossack glory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sang of the wars of Taras brave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of battle fought in the morning early,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fallen Cossack’s grass-grown grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till smiles and tears did mingle fairly.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>“Once on a time the Hetmans ruled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">It comes not back again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In olden days we masters were</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">This never comes again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These glories of old Cossack lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be forgotten nevermore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Ukraine, Ukraine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Mother mine. Mother mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">When I remember thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">How mournful should I be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What has come of our Cossacks bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With coats of velvet red?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What of freedom by fate foretold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And banners the Hetmans led?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Whither is it gone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In flames it went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er hills and tombs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The floods were sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hills are wrapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">in silence grim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On boundless sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">waves ever play;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tombs gleam forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">with sadness dim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">the foe holds sway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Play on, oh sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Hills silent be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dance, mighty wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">O’er all the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep, Cossack youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Your fate withstand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now who shall our adviser be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then out spake Naleweiko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Cossack bold was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After him Paulioha</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like falcon swift did flee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Out spake Taras Traselo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bitter words and true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That they trampled on Ukraina</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sure the Poles shall rue.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out spake Taras Traselo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out spake the eagle grey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rescue for the faith he wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well indeed the Poles he taught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let’s make an end of our woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An end come now to your woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arise, my gentle comrades, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the Poles with blows we’ll fall.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Three days of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">did the land deliver.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Delta’s shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">to Trubail’s river.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields are covered</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">with dead, in course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But weary now</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">is the Cossack force.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the dirty Polish ruler</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was feeling very jolly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered all his lords together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a time of feast and folly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taras did his Cossacks gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have a little talk together.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">“Captains and comrades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My children and brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are we now to do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hated foes are feasting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I want advice from you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Let them feast away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">It’s fine for their health.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the sun descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old night her counsel lends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cossacks’ll catch them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">and all of their wealth.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sun reclined beyond the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars shone out in silence still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the Poles the Cossack host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was gathering like a cloud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon the moon stood in the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When roared the cannon loud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Woke up the Polish lordlings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To run they found no place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woke up the Polish lordlings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foe they could not face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun beheld the Polish lordlings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In heaps all o’er the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With red serpent on the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>River Alta brings the word—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That black vultures after slaughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May feast on many a Polish lord.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now the vultures hasten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty dead to waken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together the Cossacks gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise to God to offer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>While black vultures scream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the corpses fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the Cossacks sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hymn to the night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That night of famous story</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of blood and glory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That night that put the Poles to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The while on them their foes did creep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beyond the stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">in open field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A burial mound</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">gleams darkly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Cossack blood was shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There grows the grass full greenly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the tomb a raven sits:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hunger sore he’s screaming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting near a Cossack weeps:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of days of old he’s dreaming.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Kobzar ceased in sadness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands would no longer play:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him youths and maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were wiping the tears away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the path the Kobzar makes his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To get rid of his grief he starts to play.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the youngsters are dancing gay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he opes his lips to say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Skip off, my children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To some nice warm corner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of griefs enough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll no longer be mourner.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the bar I’ll go</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">and find my good wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there we’ll have</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">the time of our life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so we’ll drink away our woes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make no end of fun of our foes.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hamaleia" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hamaleia<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">“Oh breeze there is none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor do the waters run</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">From our Ukraina’s land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perhaps, in council there they stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To march against the Turk demand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We hear not in this foreign land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Blow winds, blow across the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bring tidings of our land so free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Come from Dnieper’s Delta low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dry our tears and chase away our woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i1">Roar in play thou sea so blue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In yon boats are Cossacks true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their caps above are dimly seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rescue for us this may mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once more we’ll hear Ukraina’s story.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Once more the ancient Cossack glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">We’ll hear before we die.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So in Skutari the Cossacks sang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their tears rolled down, their wailing rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bosphorus groaned at the Cossack cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he raised his waves on high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shivering like a great grey bull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His waters roaring far and full</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the Black Sea’s ribs were hurled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea sent on great Bosphorus’ cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To where the sands of the Delta lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the waters of Dnieper pale</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In turn took up the mournful tale.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The father Dnieper rears his crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shakes the foam from off his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With laughter now aloud he calls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spirits of the forest walls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hortessa sister river, deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time it is to wake from sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother forest, sister river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come our children to deliver.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Dnieper is clad with boats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cossack song o’er the water floats.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">“In Turkey over there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Are wealth and riches rare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Hey, hey, blue sea play.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Then roar upon the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Bringing with you guests so gay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">“This Turkey has in her pockets</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Dollars and ducats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">We don’t come pockets to pick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Fire and sword will do the trick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">We mean to free our brothers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i3">“There the janissary crouches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">There are pashas on soft couches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Hey-ho, foemen ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">For nothing do we care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">Ours are liberty and glory.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">On they sail a-singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The sea to the wind gives heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In foremost boat the helm a-guiding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Brave Hamaleia takes the lead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">“Oh, Hamaleia, our hearts are fainting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Behold the sea in madness raving.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“Don’t fear,” he says, “these spurting fountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">We’ll hide behind the water mountains.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All slumber in the harem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Byzantium’s paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skutari sleeps, but Bosphorus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In madness shouts, “Arise!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awake Byzantium!” it roars and groans.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Awake them not, Oh Bosphorus.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Replies the sea in thunder tones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thou dost I’ll fill thy ribs with sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury thee in mud, change thee to solid land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps thou knowest not the guest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I bring to break the sultan’s rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the sea insisted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he loved the brave Slavonic band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Bosphorus desisted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While in slumber lay the Turkish land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lazy Sultan in his harem slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only in Skutari the weary pris’ners wept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For something are they waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To God from dungeon praying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the waves go roaring by.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, loved God of Ukraine’s land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To us in prison stretch thy hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaves are we a Cossack band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame it is now in truth to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame it will be at judgment day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us from foreign tomb to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at thy court, to the world’s surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show Cossack hands in chains.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i7">“Strike and kill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the infidels will get their fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death to the unbelievers all.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How they scream beyond the wall!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They’ve heard of Hamaleia’s fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skutari maddens at his name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Strike on,” he shouts, “kill and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the castle break your way.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the guns of Skutari roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foes in frenzy onward pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cossacks rush with panting breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The janissaries fall in death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Hamaleia in Skutari</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Dances through the flames in glee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the jail his way he makes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Through the prison doors he breaks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Off the feet the fetters takes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">“Fly away my birds so gray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">In the town to share the prey.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But the falcons trembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Nor their fears dessembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">So long they had not heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">A single christian word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">Night herself was frightened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">No flames her darkness lightened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">The old mother could not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">How the Cossacks pay their fee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">“Fear not! Look ahead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To the Cossack banquet spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Dark over all, like a common day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And this no little holiday.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">“No sneak thieves with Hamaleia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To eat their bacon silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Without a frying pan.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span class="i2">“Let’s have a light,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Now burning bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">To heaven flames Skutari,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With all its ruined navy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Byzantium awakes, its eyes it opens wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grinding teeth hastes to its comrade’s side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Byzantium roars and rages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hands to the shore it reaches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From waters gasping strives to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then with sword in heart it dies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With fires of hell Skutari’s burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bazaars with streams of blood are churning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad Bosphorus pours in its waves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like blackbirds in a bush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Cossacks fiercely rush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No living soul escapes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untouched by fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They the walls down tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver and gold in their caps they bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And load their boats with riches rare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Burns Skutari, ends the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warriors gather and come away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their pipes with burning cinders light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And row their boats through waves flame bright.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-dream" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Dream<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Oh my lofty hills—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not so lofty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But beautiful ye are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sky-blue in the distance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Older than old Pereyaslav,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the tombs of Vebla,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like those clouds that rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the Dnieper.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I walk with quiet step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And watch the wonders peeping out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the clouds march silently</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarped cliff and bush and solitary tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White cottages creep forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like children in white garments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing in the valley’s gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far below our gray old Cossack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Dnieper, sings musically</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amid the woods.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then beyond the Dnieper on the hillside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little Cossack church</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands like a chapel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With its leaning cross.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long it stands there, gazing, waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Cossacks from the Delta;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Dnieper prattles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telling all its woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From its green-stained windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like eyes of the dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It peeps as from the tomb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou look for restoration?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expect not such glory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robbed are thy people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For what care the wicked lords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the ancient Cossack fame?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Traktemir above the hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatters its wretched houses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a drunken beggar’s bags.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there is old Manaster</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once a Cossack town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is that the one that used to be?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All, all is gone, as a playground for the kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The land of the Zaporogues and the village</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All, all the greedy ones have taken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you hills, you permitted it!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May no one look on you more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cursed ones!—No! No!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not you I curse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But our quarreling generals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the inhuman Poles.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forgive me, my lofty ones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lofty ones and blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finest in the world, and holiest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive me, I pray God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so I love my poor Ukraina,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might blaspheme the holy God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for her lose my soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a curve of lofty Traktemir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lonely cottage like an orphan stands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to plunge from off the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To loved Dnieper, far below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that house Ukraina is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the land of the Hetmans.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the house an old gray father sits.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the river the sun goes down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he sits, and looks, and sadly thinks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alas, Alas!” the old man cries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fools, that lost this land of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hetmans’ land.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brow with thought is clouded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something bitter he would have said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But did not.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Much have I wandered in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In peasant’s coat and garb of lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How is it beyond the Ural,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the Kirghiz, Tartars?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good God, even there it is better</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in our Ukraina.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps because the Kirghiz</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are not Christians.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much evil hast thou done, Oh Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast changed the people God had made.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Cossacks lost their foolish heads</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For truth, and the Christian faith.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much blood they shed, their own and others.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And were they better for it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bah! No! They were ten times worse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart from knife and auto-da-fe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have chained up the people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they kill them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh gentlemen, Christian gentlemen!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My grey old man, with sorrow beaten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceased, and bent his brave old head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evening sun gilded the woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The river and fields were covered with gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mazeppa’s cathedral in whiteness shines;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Bogdan’s tomb is gleaming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The willows bend o’er the road to Kiev,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hide the Three Brothers’ ancient graves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trubail and Alta, mid the reeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Approach, unite in sisterly embrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything, everything gladdens the eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the heart is sad and will not see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glowing sun has bade farewell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dark land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The round moon rises with her sister star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out they step from behind the clouds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clouds rejoiced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the old man gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his tears rolled down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I pray Thee, merciful God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty Lord, Heavenly Judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffer me not to perish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant me strength to overcome my woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live out my life on these sacred hills:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To glorify Thee and rejoice in Thy beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at last, though beaten by the people’s sins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be buried on these lofty hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to abide on them.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He dried his tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hot tears, though not the tears of youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought on the blessed years of long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where was this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What, how, and when?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was it truth, or was it dream?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On what seas have I been sailing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The green wood in the twilight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden with eyebrows dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon at rest among the stars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nightingale on the viburnum,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether in silence or in song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praising the Holy God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all, all is in Ukraina.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old man smiled—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, it may be—you can’t avoid the truth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So it was—they wooed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They parted, they did not marry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She left him to live alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live out his life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The old man was sad again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandered long about the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then prayed to God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went in the house to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the moon was swathed in clouds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus in a foreign land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dreamed my dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if born again to the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In freedom once more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant me, Oh God, some time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In old age, perchance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand again on these stolen hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a little cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring my heart eaten out with sorrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest at last, on the hills above the Dnieper.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="naimechka" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title" xml:lang="uk-Latn">Naimechka</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">Or, The Servant</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="naimechka-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>On a Sunday, very early,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When fields were clad with mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman’s form was bending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid graves by cloud wreaths kissed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something to her heart she pressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In accents low the clouds addressed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, you mist and raindrops fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity this ragged luck of mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hide me here in grassy meadows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bury me beneath thy shadows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why must I ’mid sorrows stray?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray take them with my life away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gloomy death would be relief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where none might know or see my grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not alone my life was spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A father and mother my sin lament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet alone is my course to run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in my arms is my little son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I, then, give to him christian name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To poverty bind, with his mother’s shame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, brother mist, I shall not do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I alone my fault must rue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, sweet son, shall strangers christen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy mother’s eyes with teardrops glisten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy very name I may not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on through life I lonely go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, by my sin, rich fortune lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thee, my son, to ill fate, was tossed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet curse me not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">for evils past.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My prayers to heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">shall reach at last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The skies above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">to my tears shall bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another fortune to thee I’ll send.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the fields she sobbing went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentle mist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">its shelter lent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tears were falling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">the path along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she softly sang</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">the widows song:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, in the field there is a grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the shining grasses wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the widow walked apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bitter sorrow in her heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poison herbs in vain she sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereby evil spells are wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two little sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">in arms she bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapped around in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">dress she wore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her children to the river carried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In converse with the water tarried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Oh, river Dunai, gentle river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I my sons to thee deliver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou’lt swaddle them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">and wrap them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy little waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">will lap them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy yellow sands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">will cherish them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy flowing waters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">nourish them.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>All by themselves lived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">an old couple fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a nice little grove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">just by a millpond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like birds of a feather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just always together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From childhood the two of them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">fed sheep together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got married, got wealthy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">got houses and lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got a beautiful garden</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">just where the mill stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An apiary full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">of beehives like boulders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet no children were theirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">and death at their shoulders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will cheer their passing years?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will soothe their mortal fears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will guard their gathered treasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In loyal service find his pleasure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will be their faithful son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When low their sands of life do run?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hard it is a child to rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In roofless house ’mid want and fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet just as hard ’mid gathered wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When death creeps on with crafty stealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one’s treasures good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">At end of life’s wandering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are for strangers rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">For mocking and squandering.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>One fine Sunday,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">in the bright sunlight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All dressed up</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">in blouses white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old folks sat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">on the bench by the door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No cloud in sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">What could they ask more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All peace and love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">it seemed like Eden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet angels above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">their hearts might read in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hidden sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">a gloomy mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like lurking beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">in darksome wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such a heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Oh, do you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever could</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">the trouble be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wonder now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">what ancient sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suddenly sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">into their morrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it quarrel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">of yesterday</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choked off, then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">revived today,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or yet some newly sprouted ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arisen to set their heaven on fire?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perchance they’re called to go to God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor longer dwell on earth’s green sod.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then who for them on that far way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horses and chariot shall array?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Anastasia, wife of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon will come our fatal day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who will lay our bones away?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“God only knows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With me always was that thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gloom into my heart has brought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together in years and failing health,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what have we gathered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">all this wealth?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“Hold a minute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearest thou? Something cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the gate—’tis like a child.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let’s run! See’st ought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought something was there.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Together they sprang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the gate running;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then stopped in silence wondering.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before the stile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">a swaddled child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not bound tightly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">just wrapped lightly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">in summer mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">with fond caress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had covered it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">with her own last dress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wondering prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">stood our fond old pair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">just seemed to plead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In little arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">stretched out you’ld read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its prayer,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">in silence all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No crying—just a little breath its call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">“See, ’Stasia!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What did I tell thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here is fortune and fate for us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer dwell we in loneliness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">and dress it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look at it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Bless it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick, bear it inside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the village I’ll ride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its ours to baptize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God-parents we need for our prize.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In this world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">things strangely run.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There’s a fellow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i8">that curses his son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Chases him away from home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Into lonely lands to roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While other poor creatures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sorrowful features,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sweat of their toiling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must much money earn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wage of their moiling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Candles to burn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prayers to repeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The saints to entreat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For children are none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This world is no fun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The way things run.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<p>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<span>Their joys do now such numbers reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God fathers and mothers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid lots of others</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold they have gathered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three pairs of each.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At even they christen him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mark is the name of him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">So Mark grows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And so it goes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For the dear old folk it is no joke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they don’t know where to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where to set him, when to pet him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the year goes and still Mark grows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet they care for him, you’d scarce tell how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as he were a good milk-cow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now a woman young and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyebrows dark and skin so white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes into this blessed place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For servant’s task she asks with grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What, what—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">say we’ll take her ’Stasia.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“We’ll take her, Trophimus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are old and little wearies us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s almost grown within a year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet he’ll need more care, I fear.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Truly he’ll need care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, praise God, I’ve done my share.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My knees are failing, so now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You poor thing, tell us your wage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is by the year or how?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What ever you like to give.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No, no, it’s needful to know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s needful, my daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">to count one’s wage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This you must learn, count what you earn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the proverb—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who counts not his money</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hasn’t got any.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, child, how will this do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You don’t know us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">We don’t know you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll stay with us a few days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Get acquainted with our ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll see you day by day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bye and bye we’ll talk of pay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it so, daughter?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Very good, uncle.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“We invite you into the house.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And so they to agreement came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The young woman seemed always the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheerful and happy as she’d married a lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who’d buy up villages just at her word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She in the house and out doth work</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From morning light to evening’s mirk.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And yet the child is her special care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever befalls, she’s the mother there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Monday nor Sunday this mother misses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give its bath and its white dresses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She plays and sings, makes wagons and things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on a holiday, plays with it all the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wondering, the old folks gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to God they give the praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So the servant never rests,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the night her spirit tests.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her chamber then, I ween,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a tear she sheds unseen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet none knows nor sees it all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the little Mark so small.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor knows he why in hours of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tossings break her slumbers light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from her couch she quickly leaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coverings o’er his limbs she keeps.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sign of cross the child she blesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her gentle care her love confesses.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Each morning Mark spreads out his hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Servant as she stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accepts, unknowing, a mother’s care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to grow is his affair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime many a year has rolled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many waters to the sea have flowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trouble to the home has come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a tear down the cheek has run.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor old ’Stasia in earth they laid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hardly old Trophim’ from death they saved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cursed trouble roared so loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then it went to sleep, I trow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the dark woods where she frightened lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peace came back in the home to stay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">The little Mark is farmer now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With ox-teams great in the fall must go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To far Crimea to barter there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Skins for salt and goods more rare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">The Servant and Trophimus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">in counsel wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Plans for his marriage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">now devise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">Dared she her thoughts utter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For the Czar’s daughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She’d send in a trice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But the most she could say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While thinking this way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Was, “Ask Mark’s advice.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i2">“My daughter, we’ll ask him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And then we’ll affiance him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So they gave him sage advice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And they made decision nice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon his grave friends about him stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sends them to woo, a stately band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back they come with towels on shoulder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the day is many hours older.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sacred bread they have exchanged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bargain now is all arranged.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’ve found a maiden in noble dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A princess true, you well may guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such a queen is in this affiance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with a general might make alliance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hail, and well done,” the old man says,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now let’s have no more delays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the marriage, where the priest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What about the wedding feast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shall take the mother’s place?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How we’ll miss my ’Stasia’s face.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tears along his cheeks do fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet a word does the Servant’s heart appall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hastily rushing from the room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In chamber near she falls in swoon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The house is silent, the light is dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sorrowing Servant thinks of him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whispers: “Mother, mother, mother.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>All the week at the wedding cake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young women in crowds both mix and bake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man is in wondrous glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all the young women dances he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sweeping the yard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He labors hard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All passers-by on foot and horseback</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hales to the court where is no lack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of good home-brew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All comers he asks to the marriage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet ’tis true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He runs around so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’d not guess from his carriage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though his joy is such a wonderful gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His old legs are ’most too heavy to lift.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Everywhere is disorder and laughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the house and in the yard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From store-room keg upon keg follows after,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Workers’ voices everywhere heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bake, they boil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sweeping toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tables and floors they wash them all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And where is the Servant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">who cares not for wage?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Kiev she is gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">on pilgrimage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yes, Anna went. The old man pled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark almost wept for her to stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As mother sit, to see him wed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her call of duty elsewhere lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No, Mark, such honor must I not take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sit while you your homage make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To parents dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mind is clear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A servant must not thy mother be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest wealthy guests may laugh at thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now may God’s mercy with thee stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the saints at Kiev I go to pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet again shall I return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto your house, if you do not spurn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My strength and toil.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With pure heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">she blessed her Mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weeping, passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">beyond the gate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then the wedding blossomed out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Work for musicians and the joyous rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dancing feet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While mead so sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fermented honey with spices dashed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the benches and tables splashed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile the Servant limps along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hastening on the weary road to Kiev.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the city come, she does not rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hires to a woman of the town;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wages carries water.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You see she money, money needs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For prayers to Holy Barbara.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She water carries, never tarries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mighty store of pennies saves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in the Lavra’s awesome caves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seeks the blessed wealth she craves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From St. John she buys a magic cap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Mark she bears it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he wears it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never a headache need he give e’er a rap.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then St. Barbara gives her a ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her new daughter back to bring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Fore all the saints</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">she makes prostrations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then home returns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i5">having paid her oblations.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She has come back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Kate with Mark makes haste to meet her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far beyond the gate they greet her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then into the house they bring her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw her to the table there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quickly spread with choicest fare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her news of Kiev they now request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Kate arranges her couch for rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“Why do they love me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why this respect?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Dear God above me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Do they suspect?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Nay, that’s not so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">’Tis just goodness, I know.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And still the Servant her secret kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet from the hurt of her penance wept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Three times have the waters frozen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice thawed at the touch of spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three times did the Servant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Kiev her store of blessings bring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each time gentle Katherine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As daughter, set her on her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fourth time led her by the mounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where many dear departed lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then prayed to God for her safe return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom in absence her heart would yearn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It was the Sunday of the Virgin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Trophimus sat in garments white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the bench, in wide straw hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All amid the sunshine bright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before him with a little dog</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His frolicsome grandson played,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The while his little granddaughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in her mother’s garb arrayed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiling he welcomed her as matron;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so at “visitors” they played.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But what did you do with the visitor’s cake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did somebody steal it in the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or perhaps you’ve simply forgotten to bake?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For so they talked in lightsome mood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But see,—Who comes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis their Anna at the door!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Run old and young! Who’ll come before?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Anna waits not their welcome wordy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Is Mark at home, or still on journey?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He’s off on journey long enough,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Says the old man in accents gruff.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With pain the Servant sadly saith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Home have I come with failing breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ’mid strangers would I wait for death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May I but live my Mark to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For something grievously weighs on me.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From little bag the children’s gifts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She takes. There’s crosses and amulets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Irene is of beads a string,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pictures too, and for Karpon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nightingale to sweetly sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toy horses and a wagon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fourth time she brings a ring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From St. Barbara to Katherine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next the old man’s gift she handles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s just three holy waxen candles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For Mark and herself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">she nothing brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For want of money</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">she nothing bought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For want of strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">more funds to earn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half a bun was her wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">on her return.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to how to divide it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the babes decide it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She enters now the house so sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daughter Katherine bathes her feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sets her down to dine in state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my Anna nor drank nor ate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“Katherine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When is our Sunday?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“After tomorrow’s the day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Prayers for the dead soon will we need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as St. Nicholas may heed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we must an offering pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Mark tarries on the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance somewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">from our vision hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sickness has ta’en him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">which God forbid.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tears dropped down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">from the sad old eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wearily did she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">from the table rise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“Katherine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My race is run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All my earthly tasks are done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My powers no longer I command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor on my feet have strength to stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, my Kate, how can I die</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While in this dear warm home I lie?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sickness harder grows amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her the sacred host’s appointed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’s been with holy oils anointed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nought relieves her pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Trophim’ in courtyard walks a-ring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moving like a stricken thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Katherine, for the suff’rers sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth never rest for her eyelids take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even the owls upon the roof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of coming evil tell the proof.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The suff’rer now, each day, each hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispers the question, with waning power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Daughter Katherine, is Mark yet here?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So struggle I with doubt and fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did I but know I’d see him for sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all my pain I might endure.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="naimechka-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now Mark comes on with the caravan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singing blithely as he can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the inns he makes no speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quietly lets the oxen feed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark brings home for Katherine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Precious cloth of substance rich;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For father dear, a girdle sewn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silk so red.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Servant Anne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">a gold cloth bonnet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deck her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And kerchief, too</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">with white lace on it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the children are shoes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">with figs and grapes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s gifts for all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">there’s none escapes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all he brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">red wine, so fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From great old city</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">of Constantine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s buckets three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">in each barrel put on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And caviar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">from the river Don.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such gifts he has</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">in his wagon there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor knows the sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">his loved ones bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On comes Mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">knows not of worry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he’s come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Give God the glory!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gate he opens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Praising God.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hear’st thou, Katherine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Run to meet him!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already he’s come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haste to greet him!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quickly bring him in to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory to Thee, my Saviour dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the strength has come from Thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And she “Our Father” softly said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as if in dream she read.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man the team unyokes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lays away the carven yokes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kate at her husband strangely looks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Where’s Anna, Katherine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve been careless!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She’s not dead?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i4">“No, not dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But very sick and calls for thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On the threshold Mark appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Standing there as torn by fears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Anna whispers, “Be not afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory to God, Who my fears allayed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go forth, Katherine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">though I love you well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve something to ask him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">something to tell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">fair Katherine went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Mark his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">o’er the Servant bent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mark, look at me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look at me well!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A secret now I have to tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this faded form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">set no longer store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No servant, I, nor Anna more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am——”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Came silence dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet guessed Mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">What was to come.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet once again her eyelids raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his eyes she deeply gazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid gathering tears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I from thee forgiveness pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve penance offered day by day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All my life to serve another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive me, son, of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I—am thy mother.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She ceased to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sudden faintness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Mark did take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">itself did shake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He roused—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">and to his mother crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">forever slept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="caucasus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Caucasus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Beyond the hills are mightier hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloud mountains o’er them rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red, red have flowed their streams and rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re sown with human woes and sighs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There long ago in days of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Olympus’ Czar, the angry Jove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wrath did pour on a hero bold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On brave Prometheus, he who strove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire of heaven to seize for men.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On mountain side, in vulture’s den</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He suffered what no mortal pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May well indite. The savage beak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his hearts’ blood doth daily reek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet the torn heart again revives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To triumph o’er its tortures strives.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our souls yield not to grievous ills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To freedom march our stubborn wills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though waves of trouble o’er us roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves move not the steadfast soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our living spirit is not in chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The word of God in glory reigns.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Tis not for us to challenge Thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though life rolls on in toil and tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though we Thy purpose cannot see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We cling to hope ’mid doubts and fears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our cause lies sunk in drunken sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When will it awaken, Lord?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oppressors gloat and patriots weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When wilt strength to us afford?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So weary, then art Thou, Oh God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can’st life to us no longer give?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy Truth we trust beneath the rod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believing in Thy strength we live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our cause shall rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our freedom rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though tyrants rage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thee alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All nations bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through age on age</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet meantime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">the streams do flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever tinged with blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">they go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beyond the hills are mightier hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloud mountains o’er them rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red, red have flowed their streams and rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re sown with human woes and sighs.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look at us in tender heartedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in hunger dire and nakedness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forging freedom in unhappiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toiling ever without blessedness.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The bones of soldiers bleaching lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In blood and tears must many die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In faith, there’s widows’ tears, I think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the Czars to give to drink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then there’s tears of many a maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falling so soft in the lonely night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hot tears of mothers, sorrow-laden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry tears of fathers, in grievous plight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not rivers, but a sea has flowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A burning sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all the Czars who in triumph rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their hounds and gamekeepers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their dogs and their beaters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May glory be!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To you be glory, hills of blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All clad in monstrous chains of frost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glory to you, ye heroes true,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With God your labors are not lost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear not to fight, you’ll win at length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For you, God’s ruth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For you is freedom, for you is strength,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Holy Truth.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-circassians" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Circassians</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Our bread and home,” in your own tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Tartar words you dare to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody gave it you, your world is young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So far no one has ta’en it away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nobody yet has led you in fetters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we have wisdom in such matters.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In God’s good word we daily read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from dungeons where the pris’ners moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Caesar’s high-exalted throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis gilt without, while the soul’s in need.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To us for wisdom should you come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll teach you all the tricks of trade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good Christians we, with church and Ikon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All goods, even God, our own we’ve made.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But that house of yours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Still hurts our eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we didn’t give it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Why should you have it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These ways of yours</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">cause much surprise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We never granted</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">The corn you planted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sunlight, you</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">Should pay for, too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, quite uneducated you!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Good Christians we, no pagans needy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sound in the faith, not a bit greedy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you in peace from us would learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Store of wisdom you would earn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With us what great illumination,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A cont’nent ’neath our domination;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Siberia great, for illustration.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s jails and folks ’yond computation.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Moldavia to Finlandia</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many tongues but nothing said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Except for blessings on your head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A holy monk here reads the Bible,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tells the story, ’tis no libel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of king who stole his neighbour’s wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then the neighbour he robbed of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The king now dwells in paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such folks ’mong us to heaven rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, you creatures unenlightened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be ye not of our dogmas frightened!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our gentle art of “grab” we’ll teach;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coin to the church and heaven you’ll reach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever is there we can’t do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stars we count and crops we sow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foreigner curse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fill our purse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people selling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis truth I’m telling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No niggers we sell, I’m not making jokes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just common ord’nary Christian folks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Spaniards we, may God forbid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Jews that stolen goods have hid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So don’t you think you’d like to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such law-abiding folks as we?</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-rich-and-great" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Rich and Great</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Is it by the apostle’s law</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye your brother love?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hypocrites and chatterers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye’re cursed of God above.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not for your brother’s soul you care.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s only for his skin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The skin from off his back you’d tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some trifling prize to win.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There’s furs for your daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slippers for your wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And things that you don’t utter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About your private life.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-master" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Master</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Oh, wherefore wert Thou crucified,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou Christ, the Son of God?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the word of Truth be glorified?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or that we good folks should ’scape the rod</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of avenging wrath, by faith confest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meanwhile of Thee we make a jest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mocking Thy love in our conduct’s test.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cathedrals and chapels with Icons grand!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mid smoke of incense lavers stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There before Thy pictured Presence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crowds unwearied make obeisance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For spoil, for war, for slaughter seek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their brother’s blood to shed they pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then before Thy form so meek</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loot of burning towns they lay.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="again-addressing-the-circassians" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Again Addressing the Circassians</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sun on us has shone so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We wish to you to give the light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sun of truth we seek to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To children blind, all in a row.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wonders all to see we’ll let you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If in our hands we only get you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of building jails we’ll show the trick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How pris’ners ’gainst their fetters kick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s knotted whips for stubborn backs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For saucy nations painful racks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In change for your mountains grand and old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this instruction we you greet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are the last things, already we hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plains and seas beneath our feet.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-jacques-de-balmont" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To Jacques de Balmont</h2>
			<p>
				<span>So they drove thee along, my dearest friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Ukraina did’st thou shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That good heart’s blood of thine so red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our country’s hangman, shame to think,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Muscovite poison gave thee to drink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, friend of mine, unforgotten friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukraine to thee doth welcome send.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy spirit fly with Cossacks bold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the shores of Dnieper old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er ancient tombs hold watch and guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weep with us in labors hard.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till I return to meet thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My songs I send to greet thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such songs they are of bitter woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet ever, always, these I sow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thoughts and songs forever sowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the care of winds bestowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentle winds of Ukraine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall bear them like the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that dear land of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To greet my friends so true.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-dead" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">To the Dead<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></h2>
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">And the Living, and the Unborn, Countrymen of Mine, in Ukraine, or Out of it, My Epistle of Friendship</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="to-the-dead-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas dawn, ’tis evening light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So passes Day divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again the weary folk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all things earthly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Take their rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I alone, remorseful</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my country’s woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Weep day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the thronged cross-roads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unheeded by all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They see not, they know not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deaf ears, they hear not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They trade old fetters for new</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And barter righteousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make nothing of their God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They harness the people</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heavy yokes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Evil they plough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With evil they sow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What crops will spring?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What harvest will you see?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arouse ye, unnatural ones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Children of Herod!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look on this calm Eden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your own Ukraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestow on her tender love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mighty in her ruins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break your fetters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join in brotherhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek not in foreign lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things that are not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet in Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in stranger’s fields,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in your own house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies your righteousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your strength and your liberty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the world is but one Ukraine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dnieper—there is only one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you must off to foreign lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look for something grand and good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wealth of goodness and liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fraternity and so forth, you found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And back you brought to Ukraine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From places far away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wondrous force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of lofty sounding words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shout aloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That God created you for this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bow the knee to lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bend and bend again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Your spineless backs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And skin again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Your brothers—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These ignorant buckwheat farmers.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Try again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to ripen crops of truth and light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Germany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or some other foreign place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If one should add</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all our present misery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the wealth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our fathers stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orphaned, indeed, would Dnieper be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with all his holy hills.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faugh! if it should happen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that you would never come back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or get snuffed out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">just where you were spawned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No children would weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor mothers lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in God’s house be heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the story of your shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun would not shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on the stench of your filth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the clean, broad, free land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would the people know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what eagles you were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor turn their heads to gaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arouse ye, be men!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evil days come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quickly a people enchained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall tear off their fetters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judgment will come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dnieper and the hills will speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred rivers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">flow to the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with your children’s blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor will there be any to help.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smoke clouds hide the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the ages</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Your sons shall curse you.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wash yourselves—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The divine likeness in you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">defile not with slime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Befool not your children</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that they were born to the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">to be lordlings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eyes of men untaught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">see deep, deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">into your soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor things they may he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet they know the ass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">in the lion’s skin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they will judge you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the foolish will pronounce the doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">of the wise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="to-the-dead-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Did you but study as you should,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You would possess your own wisdom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you might creep up to heaven.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But it is we—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Oh, no, not we;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">It is I—no, no, not I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve seen it all, I know it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s neither heaven nor hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not even God—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Just I and the short, fat German,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Nothing more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Grand, my brother.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You ask me something,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“I don’t know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Ask the German,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">He’ll tell you.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s the way you learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in foreign lands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The German says—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“You are Mongols.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Mongols, Mongols;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naked children</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the golden Tamerlane.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The German says—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“You are Slavs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Slavs, Slavs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ugly offspring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of famous ancestors.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You read the writings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the great Slavophils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Push in among them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Get on so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you know all the tongues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the Slavonic peoples</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except your own—God help it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh, as for that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sometime we’ll speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">our own language</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the German</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shows us how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our history too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he will explain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then we’ll be alright!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came about finely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on the German advice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They learned to speak so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That even the mighty German</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">could not understand them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to speak of common folks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh what a noise and racket!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“There’s Harmony, and Force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Music—and everything.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as for History</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Epic of a free people!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What’s all this about the poor Romans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brutus, etcetera, and the Devil knows what?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have we not our Brutuses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and our Cocles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glorious and never to be forgotten?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why freedom grew up with us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bathed in the Dnieper</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rested her head on our hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The far-flung Steppes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are her garments.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! ’twas in blood she bathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillowed her head on burial mounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On bodies of Cossack freemen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">Corpses despoiled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But look ye well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Read again of that glory!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read it, word by word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Miss not a jot nor tittle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grasp it all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then ask yourselves—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who are we? Whose sons?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of what fathers?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">By whom and why enchained?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then you shall see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who your glorious Brutuses are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slaves, door-mats!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mud of Moscow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">scum of Warsaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">are your lords;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glorious heroes they are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why are you so proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sons of unhappy Ukraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you go so well under the yoke?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even better you go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">than your fathers went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don’t brag so much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they just skin you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rendered out your fathers’ bones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps you are proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that your brotherhood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">has defended the faith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You cooked your dough-nuts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er the fires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">of burning Turkish towns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Sinope and Trebizond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">True for you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">And you ate them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now they pain you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on your own fields</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the wily German</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">plants potatoes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You buy them from him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">eat them for the good of your health</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and praise Cossackery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with whose blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was the land sprinkled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">that grew the potatoes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, that’s a trifle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so long as it’s good for the garden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Very proud you are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that we once destroyed Poland.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Very true indeed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Poland fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">but fell on top of us.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So your fathers shed their blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Moscow and for Warsaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left to you, their sons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their fetters and their glory.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="to-the-dead-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To the very limit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">has our country come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her own children</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">crucify her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">worse than the Poles.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How like beer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they draw off</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">her righteous blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would, you see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">enlighten the maternal eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">with everlasting fires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lead on the poor blind cripple</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">after the spirit of the age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">German fashion!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fine, go ahead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">show us the way!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the old mother learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how to look after such children</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For this instruction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don’t worry—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Good motherly reward will be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The illusion fades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from your greedy eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory shall you see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such glory as fits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">the sons of deceitful sires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To study then, my brothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think and read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learn from the foreigner</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despise not your own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who forgets his mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him God will punish.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foreigners will despise him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor admit him to their homes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His children shall as strangers be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall he find happiness on earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I weep when I remember</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the deeds of our fathers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">deeds I can not forget.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heavy on my heart they lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Half my life I’d give</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">could I forget them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such is our glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the glory of Ukraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So read then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that ye may see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not in dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but in vision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">All the wrongs that lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i3">beneath yon mighty tombs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask then of the martyrs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by whom, when and for what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i4">were they crucified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embrace then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">brothers mine—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The least of your brethren.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That your mother may smile again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smile through her tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give blessings to your children</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with hard toiler’s hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With free lips kiss them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when they are washed and clad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forget the shameful past</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the true glory shall live again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the glory of the Ukraine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clear light of day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">not twilight gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall gently shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love one another, my brothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you—I plead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="to-the-makers-of-sentimental-idyls" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Makers of Sentimental Idyls</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Did you but know, fine dandy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people’s life of misery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You would not use such pretty phrases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor give to God such empty praises.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At our tears you’re laughing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our sorrows chaffing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slave’s cot in a shady spot—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You call it heaven! Rot!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lived once in such a shanty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of childhood’s tears I shed a plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bitter sorrows we were wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home that you call paradise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No paradise I call thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little cottage in the wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the water pure beside thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close by the village rude!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There my mother bore me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing she tended me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My child’s heart drank in her pain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cottage in the shady dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaven outside, inside hell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But slavery there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">with labor weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor time for prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">in life so dreary.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My mother good to her early grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was hurled by sorrows wave on wave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The father weeping o’er his young,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">(little and naked were we),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank ’neath the weight of fated wrong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And died in slavery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The children, we, of home bereft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like little mice ’mong neighbors crept.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Water drawer was I at school,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My brothers toiled ’neath landlord’s rule.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For my sisters an evil fate must be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though little doves they seemed to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into life as serfs they’re born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And die they must in that lot forlorn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I shudder yet, where’er I roam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I think of life in that village home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Evil-doers, Oh God, are we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An earthly heaven we had from Thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned it into hell have we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a second heaven is now our plea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Gently we live with our brothers now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their lives our fields we plough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fields that with their tears are wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do we know?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">yet it seems as if Thou!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For without Thy will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should we suffer ill?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost Thou, Oh Father in heaven holy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laugh at us the poor and lowly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advise with them of noble birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How so cleverly to rule the earth?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For see the woods their branches waving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there beyond, the white pool gleaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And willows o’er the water bending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Garden of Eden it is in sooth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of its deeds enquire the truth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This wondrous earth should tell a story</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of endless joy, and praise, and glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thee, Oh God, unique and holy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhallowed spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence praise comes not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A world of tears where curses rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To heaven above the hopeless skies.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-poem-of-exile" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Poem of Exile</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I count in prison the days and nights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then forget the count.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How heavily, Oh Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do these days pass!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the years flow after them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quietly they flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing with them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good and ill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything do they gather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never do they return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You need not plead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your prayers unanswered fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid oozy swamps</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">among the weeds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Year after weary year</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">has sadly flowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much of something have they taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From dark store-house of my heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne it quietly to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">As quietly the sea swallowed it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not gold and silver</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Did they take from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But good years of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Freighted with loneliness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrows written on the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">With unseen pen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a fourth year passes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">So gently, so slowly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourth book</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">of my imprisonment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I start to stitch up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embroidering it with tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Of homesickness</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">in a foreign land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet such woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">tells itself not in words.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never, never</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">in the wide world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In far away captivity</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">There are no words</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Just nothingness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even God above thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing is there to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None with whom to speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even desire for life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet thou must live!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must! I must!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">But for what?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may not lose my soul?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My soul is not worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">such suffering!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then why must I live on</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">in the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag these fetters</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">in my jail?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because, perchance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">my own Ukraine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall see again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again I shall pour out</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">my words of sorrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the green groves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">and rich meadows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No family have I of my own</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">in all Ukraine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet the people there</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">are different from these foreigners</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would walk again</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">among the bright villages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Dnieper’s banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">and sing my thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">gentle and sad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Oh God of mercy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may live</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">to see again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those green meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">those ancestral tombs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Thou wilt not grant this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Yet bear my tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my Ukraine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Because, God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I die for her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may be that I shall lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">more lightly in foreign soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sometimes in Ukraine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">they speak of my memory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carry my tears then</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Oh God of loving kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or at least</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">send hope into my soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can think no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">with my poor head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For coldness of death</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">comes on me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I think that they may</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">bury me in foreign soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bury my thoughts with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">And none tell about me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">in the Ukraine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And yet it may be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">that gently through the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My tear-embroidered songs</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">shall fly sometime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">as dew upon the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the tender heart of youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And youth shall nod assent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weep for me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making mention of me in its prayers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, as it will be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">so it will be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps ’twill swim</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Perhaps ’twill wade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet even if they crucify me for it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll still write my verses.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="memories-of-an-exile" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Memories of an Exile</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Memories of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Memories of home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sole wealth of mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Where’er I roam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When sorrows lower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In evil hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And griefs o’ertake me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll not forsake me</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">From the land of my early loves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will fly like grey-winged doves</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From broad Dnieper’s shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the steppes to soar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here the Kirghiz Tartars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwell naked in poverty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re wretched as martyrs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this is their liberty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To God they may pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And none say them nay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will you but fly to meet me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gentle words</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I’ll greet ye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">ye children dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er past loves</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">we’ll shed a tear.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="death-of-the-soul" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Death of the Soul</h2>
			<p>
				<span>As the nights pass, so pass the days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The year itself passes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Again I hear the rustling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">of autumn leaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light of the eyes is fading,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Memory is in the heart asleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything sleeps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">and I know not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I live or am already dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so, aimless</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">I wander in the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer weep nor laugh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fate, where art thou?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fate, where art thou?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s none of any sort!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost grudge me good fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Oh God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then send it bad, as bad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave me not</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">to a walking sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heart like bears’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">in wintry den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet like rotten log</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">on earth to lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But give me to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">with the heart to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And love the people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you won’t</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Let me curse them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>and burn up the world.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Terrible it is to fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">into dungeons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet much worse—to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleep and sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">in freedom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slumber for an eternity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave not a footprint behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All alike—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">whether one lives or dies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fate where art thou?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fate where art thou?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s none of any sort!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost grudge me good fate, Oh God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then give me bad, as bad.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="hymn-of-exile" epub:type="z3998:hymn">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Hymn of Exile</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The sun goes down beyond the hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shadows darken, birds are still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From fields no more come toiler’s voices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In blissful rest the world rejoices.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lifted heart I, gazing stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek shady grove in Ukraine’s land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifted thus, ’mid memories fond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart finds rest, o’er the hills beyond.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On fields and woods the darkness falls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From heaven blue a bright star calls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tears fall down. Oh, evening star!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou appeared in Ukraine far?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that fair land do sweet eyes seek thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dear eyes that once were wont to greet me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have eyes forgotten their tryst to keep?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh then, in slumber let them sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer o’er my fate to weep.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="on-the-eleventh-psalm" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">On the Eleventh Psalm</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Merciful God, how few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good folk remain on earth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, each one in heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is setting snares for another.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with fine words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lips honey-sweet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They kiss—and wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see how soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their brother to his grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will find his way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Thou who art Lord alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shuttest up the evil lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That great-speaking tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That says:—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">“No trifling thing are we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How glorious shall we show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In intellect and speech.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is that Lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">that will forbid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our thoughts and words?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yea, the Lord shall say to Thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I shall arise, this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their behalf—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">People of mine in chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor and humble ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">These will I glorify.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little, dumb and slaves are they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet on guard about them</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Will I set my Word.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Like trampled grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall perish your thoughts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And words alike.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Like silver, hammered, beaten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven times melted o’er the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are thy words, Oh Lord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatter these holy words of Thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er all the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Thy children</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">little and poor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May believe in miracles on earth.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="prayer-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Prayer</h2>
				<h3 hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">To Tsars and Kings</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>To Tsars and kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>who tax the world,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send dollars and ducats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fetters well-forged.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To toiling heads and toiling hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laboring on these stolen lands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Endurance and strength.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To me, my God, on this sad earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me but love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">the heart’s paradise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing more.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="prayer-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Prayer</h2>
				<h3 hidden="hidden" epub:type="subtitle">My Prayer for the Tsars</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>My prayer for the Tsars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">These traffickers in blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Thou on them would’st put</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Fetters of iron, in dungeons deep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My prayer for the peoples</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i3">toiling long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do Thou to them</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i5">on their ravaged lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send down Thy strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">most merciful One.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the pure in heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i2">Grant angel guards beside them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep them pure.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And for myself, Oh Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ask nought else</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But truth on earth to love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one true friend</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i4">to love me.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
